---
book: Facilitator's Guide
title: Facilitator’s Checklist
layout: chapter
---

# How to run a Bettercare group: Facilitator’s Checklist

## Before the first group meeting:

* Identify a need/s for training at your institution.
* Decide which need is the most urgent (you can get input from other staff members here).
* Choose an appropriate Bettercare course.
* Get stakeholder buy-in.
* Advertise the course.
* Hold a preliminary, information session about the Bettercare course you will run.
* Sign up group members and get contact details for them (about 5-10).
* Organise how you will read the books (online for free or order print versions).
* Contact everyone to say when and where the first official meeting will be held.
* Start a ‘Bettercare Group Facilitator’s File’ (a flip-file is an easy and neat option) where you keep copies of templates, notes and important documents.

## At the first group meeting:

* Group members introduce themselves.
* Introduce and discuss what decentralised learning means.
* Make group rules that everyone agrees with.
* Establish goals that everyone shares.
* Explain how the course and the book works.
* Explain your role in the group (not a tutor, but a facilitator).
* Decide how, when and where future group meetings will happen.
* Decide if you think you will want to write the exam at the end of the course (this decision does not have to be final, but will give a good idea of what group members want to come out of doing this course).
* Choose a treasurer (who will monitor the budget and finances).

## Before every group meeting:

* All group members must read the relevant chapter/skills chapter.
* Create the lesson plan (see Chapter 4. How to run a Bettercare group).
* Make sure you have all the resources you need for the meeting (paper, pens, photographs or anything needed for the skills demonstration).
* Organise someone to demonstrate the skill if the meeting concerns a skills chapter.
* Make sure you know the venue and time for the upcoming meeting and send out a reminder SMS to all group members.

## At group meetings:

* Discuss difficult sections of the chapter you have all studied the previous week, allowing all members to contribute.
* Go through the chapter case studies, encouraging all group members to read a case study aloud and/or answer a question.
* Have a demonstration and discussion of the relevant skill if the meeting covers a skills  chapter.
* Everyone does the post test for the chapter you have studied and discussed.
* Everyone marks and records the pre- and post tests from the chapter you have just studied and discussed.
* Everyone completes the pre-test for the next chapter.


## After the course:

* Decide who would like to write the exam (including yourself).
* Email exams@bettercare.co.za to request as many exams as you need.
* If you will be writing the exam, organise an objective exam coordinator.
* Write the one-hour, 75-question exam.
* Notify Bettercare of the participants’ results.
* Receive certificates.
* If 50% of your group are successful in the exam, you will receive a Bettercare Group Facilitator’s Certificate to acknowledge your initiative and leadership capability.
* Arrange a certificate handover ceremony if possible.
* Take a group photo and send to info@bettercare.co.za.




