---
book: Ebola Prevention and Control
title: Test
layout: test
---

# Test 4: Support Services and Documentation

1.	What are healthcare support services?
	1.	The services that find adequate funding to pay healthcare staff
	1.	The services that make sure that staff have a safe working environment
	1.	Services which care for staff if they become infected with Ebola
	1.	The services which help staff find employment
2.	What is the procurement of provisions in a healthcare service?
	1.	Buying the goods needed for delivering healthcare services
	1.	Locking up equipment to make sure that it is not stolen
	1.	Repairing damaged equipment needed for a support service
	1.	Counting provisions to assess whether they are adequate
3.	What considerations are needed in dealing with donated stock?
	1.	Making sure that the donor’s name is displayed
	1.	Making sure that the donor is told whether the stock is used
	1.	Making sure that any unused stock is returned to the donor
	1.	Making sure that the donated stock is appropriate to the local conditions
4.	Questions to ask when electrical machinery is donated:
	1.	Is there a service contract and are spare parts available?
	1.	Is this the most expensive equipment available?
	1.	Is the equipment brand new or has it been used before?
	1.	Is the equipment made in a foreign country?
5.	What is decontamination of equipment?
	1.	Taking the equipment apart before it is cleaned
	1.	Making sure that the equipment has not been stolen or damaged
	1.	Ensuring that the equipment is safe to be used again on the next patient
	1.	Removing the name of the make or donor of the equipment
6.	Cleaning equipment means:
	1.	Getting rid of all bacteria, viruses and fungi
	1.	Polishing the surface so that it shines
	1.	Removing dirt and organic matter
	1.	Soaking the equipment in alcohol
7.	What is disinfection?
	1.	Deciding that a patient is no longer infectious
	1.	Using heat or a chemical to remove most microorganisms
	1.	Making sure that all microorganisms are removed
	1.	A test to determine whether equipment is clean enough to be used on patients
8.	What disinfectant is commonly used on surfaces (the environment)?
	1.	Liquid soap
	1.	Chlorine bleach (chlorine solution)
	1.	Tap water
	1.	50% alcohol or methylated spirits
9.	Sterilisation is a method of:
	1.	Killing all microorganisms including spores
	1.	Cleaning metal equipment with chlorine
	1.	Making sure that all organic material is removed
	1.	Destroying soiled linen, surgical swabs or bandages
10.	What is the meaning of reprocessing of devices?
	1.	Replacing old devices with new ones
	1.	A process which makes sure that it is safe to reuse a medical device
	1.	Ordering and paying for new devices
	1.	Repairing damaged or defective devices
11.	What is the effect of exposing Ebola virus to heat generated by sunshine?
	1.	Sunshine (heat) has no effect on the virus
	1.	Sunshine (heat) stimulates the virus to rapidly multiply
	1.	Sunshine (heat) slows the growth of the virus
	1.	Sunshine (heat) rapidly kills the virus
12.	How should you clean soiled bedpans and urinals?
	1.	Washing them well with soap and water is adequate
	1.	They should first be washed and then disinfected
	1.	They must be sterilised
	1.	They must be discarded and not used again
13.	How should plates and saucers be cleaned in an Ebola outbreak?
	1.	Wash well under running water
	1.	Allow to soak for a few minutes in warm water and a detergent
	1.	They must always be wiped well with a chlorine solution
	1.	Discard or sterilise them
14.	What is terminal cleaning?
	1.	Cleaning which is carried out after a patient has been discharged or has died
	1.	Cleaning the room of a patient who is severely ill or dying of Ebola
	1.	The weekly cleaning of a clinic on Friday afternoon after all the patients have left
	1.	The use of disinfectants to clean up a bed soiled with stool
15.	How should a spill of blood or body fluid be handled?
	1.	Always clean the most contaminated area first
	1.	Spray a disinfectant on all surfaces then wash well
	1.	Wipe all surfaces with detergent and then a chlorine solution
	1.	Use a mask and apron and mop the floor with a weak detergent only
16.	How should soiled linen be handled?
	1.	Soak in detergent then a chlorine solution for 30 minutes each
	1.	Clean off any obvious contamination then send to the laundry for a hot wash
	1.	Wash well with detergent and allow to dry in the sun
	1.	Wipe down with an alcohol or chlorine solution then send to the laundry
17.	What is the best way to disinfect a mattress?
	1.	Place it in the sun for a few hours
	1.	Sprinkle both surfaces with chlorine powder
	1.	If contaminated with Ebola virus the mattress should be burned
	1.	Clean first then wipe the surface well with a 0.05% chlorine solution
18.	How should medical waste be handled?
	1.	Always use a green plastic bag to identify as infected material
	1.	Wipe the bag with a chlorine solution and keep it in the clinical area until collection
	1.	Use a red plastic bag and label it as 'infectious'
	1.	It is safest to flush down the toilet
19.	What method should be used to dispose of medical waste?
	1.	Once it has been stored for a week it can safely be put on a municipal rubbish site
	1.	It is best burned or incinerated
	1.	Soak all waste in a chlorine solution to kill any microorganisms
	1.	Bury it in a land fill site
20.	What should you do to safely dispose of sharps?
	1.	Place them in a plastic bag labelled 'sharps'
	1.	Place them in a strong plastic box then add to normal ward waste
	1.	Collect them at the end of a procedure and place in a special sharps box
	1.	Drop them into a special sharps box immediately after use