---
book: Congenital Disorders
title: Social grants available in South Africa for people with disability
layout: chapter
---

# Addendum B: Social grants available in South Africa for people with disability

## Contents
{:.non-printing}

*   [Qualifying requirements for social assistance](#qualifying-requirements-for-social-assistance)
*   [Social grants for persons with disability](#social-grants-for-persons-with-disability)
{:.chapter-toc}

## Qualifying requirements for social assistance

In order to qualify for a social grant for persons with a disability, the applicant:

1.	Must be a South African citizen.
1.	Must be resident in the Republic at the time of application.
1.	Must be a person with a disability, who has attained the age of 18 years and as a result of his/her degree of disability be unable to obtain employment to support him/herself.
1.	The period of disability for all work must either be permanent or temporary for a continuous period of six months up to one year.
1.	Must not refuse to undergo the necessary medical treatment, unless the treatment may be life threatening.
1.	As well as the spouse, must comply with the means test.
1.	Must not be maintained or cared for in a State Institution.
1.	Must not be in receipt of another social grant in respect of him/herself.

## Social grants for persons with disability

### Foster child grants

The qualifying requirements are:

1.	Child or children must be legally placed in the care of the foster parent/s.
1.	The income of the foster child must not exceed twice the annual amount of a foster child grant.
1.	The applicant and foster child or children must be resident in the Republic at the time of application.

Note
:	The foster parents and children need not be South African Citizens.

### Care dependency grants

The qualifying requirements are:

1.	The parent/s and care-dependant child must be South African Citizens.
1.	The applicant and care-dependant child must be resident in the Republic at the time of application.
1.	The care-dependant child or children must be between the ages of one and 18 years.
1.	The child must be a care-dependant child as defined in the Act.
1.	Medical treatment must not be refused provided that it is not life threatening.
1.	The care-dependant child or children must be legally in the care of the parent or foster parent.
1.	The applicant and spouse and child must comply with the means test (the income of the foster parents will not be taken into consideration).
1.	The care-dependant child or children must not be permanently cared for in a State Institute.

### Child support grants

The qualifying requirements are:

1.	The child and primary care giver must be South African Citizens.
1.	The child and primary care giver must be resident in the Republic at the time of application.
1.	The applicant must be the primary care giver of the child or children concerned.
1.	The child or children must:
	*	Be under the age of nine years during the period 1 April 2003 to 31 March 2004.
	*	Be under the age of 11 years during the period 1 April 2004 to 31 March 2005.
	*	Be under the age of 14 years after 1 April 2005.
1.	The grant is payable in respect of a maximum of six children.
1.	The primary care giver must not receive remuneration to take care of the child or children concerned.
1.	An institution must not receive an award for taking care of the child.
1.	The primary care giver or any other person must not already be in receipt of a grant on behalf of the child.
